Sections:

	- description of VOT (acoustic differences between ENG & SPA) 
	- examples of other types of intralanguage adaptations (vowel perception according to social variables, Drager, 2010)
	- production interlanguage adaptations in bilinguals
	- importance of language mode

There is broad research on intralanguage variation regarding speech production (see Drager, 2010 for a review). In particular, phonetic variation is associated both with the communication context and the speaker’s characteristics. For instance, the formality of the situation (Labov, 1972), how frequently a speaker has encountered a word (Bybee, 2002) or how likely a word is to appear in a specific position in a sentence (Jurafsky, Bell & Girand, 2002) are factors affecting speech variation. In social terms, speakers’ characteristics such as dialect area (Niedzielski 1999; Hay et al. 2006a), age (Hay et al. 2006b; Koops et al. 2008, Drager 2011) or socio-economic status (Hay et al. 2006b) affect how the phonemes produced by these speakers are perceived. Furthermore, a speaker’s sound perception is a reflection of his own production (Fridland and Okamoto, 2009; Ladefoged & Broadbent, 1957; Willis, 1972). In fact, the amount of exposure to other dialects can affect how sounds are perceived and the ability of a speaker to attribute social characteristics to other speakers (Bowir, 2000; Clopper & Pisoni, 2004). However, speech production and perception do not always change hand in hand, and speakers’ may shift consonant perception but not their production (Evans & Iverson, 2007, Thomas, 2000). Whereas intralanguage variation has been informed by vast amounts of research, interlanguage variation has been scarcely investigated. 

Studying interlanguage variation can shed light on how phonemes systems are stored and the sounds are rearranged from language to language, especially when the categorization of a phoneme continuum needs to be shifted from a first language (L1) to a second language (L2). An example of this shift is the phoneme continuum /b/-/p/ that differs from English to Spanish. In utterance-initial position, /b/ and /p/ are both voiceless in English, and /p/ is aspirated (Beckman, Jessen, & Ringen, 2013; Iverson & Salmons, 1995; Lisker & Abramson, 1964). In Spanish, both are unaspirated, but /b/ is voiced (Abramson & Lisker, 1972; Kirby & Ladd, 2016; Lisker & Abramson, 1964; Rosner, López-Bascuas, García-Albea, & Fahey, 2000). In English phonemes are thus distinguished through aspiration, and in Spanish through voicing. These properties make an English speaker perceive an unaspirated, voiceless bilabial stop, [p], as /b/ whereas a Spanish speaker will be prone to categorize it as /b/ (Elman, Diehl, & Buchwald, 1977). A bilingual speaker will therefore need to shift the phoneme perceptual boundary according to the language he is speaking in order to accurately categorize the sounds heard.    

Previous studies (Casillas & Simonet, 2018; Gonzales & Lotto, 2013; Gonzales, Heinlein, & Lotto, 2019) indicate that bilinguals exhibit a double phonemic boundary (i.e., a difference between labeling functions obtained when listeners find themselves in Spanish mode and those obtained when they are in English mode) for a consonantal phoneme continuum. These studies provide evidence supporting the notion that there is some degree of separation between phonetic systems in the bilingual mind.

A separation of phonemic systems between languages aligns with language modes (Grosjean, 1999, 2001). Speakers move from a language mode to the other depending on the language depending on the context. So far, the role of perceptual cues (Gonzales & Lotto, 2013) and conceptual cues (Gonzales, Heinlein, & Lotto, 2019) have been tested as activators of language mode in early bilinguals. Perceptual cues also activate language mode in late bilinguals (Casillas & Simonet, 2018). Choosing a language mode or another lets speakers shift their mental perception categorization to make sense of the oncoming messages and to produce information with the correct linguistic properties of the language.

Gonzales & Lotto (2013) investigated how bilinguals perceptually accommodate speech variation across languages. In their experiment, Spanish-English bilinguals and English monolinguals listened to Spanish and English continua of pseudowords ('bafri' and 'pafri') and indicated which of the two "words" was spoken by pressing a key. The language context was manipulated through the instructions and through the phonetic makeup of pseudoword endings. Gonzales & Lotto (2013) found that Spanish-English bilinguals had separate perceptual boundaries depending upon the language-specific continua. The findings suggest that bilinguals adjust perceptual categorization across language contexts by switching between language-specific phonetic systems.

Casillas & Simonet (2018) found further evidence that bilinguals can maintain separate phonetic systems. Specifically, they explored whether Spanish-English bilinguals and native English speaking L2 learners of Spanish utilized different categorization criteria based on language mode (unilingual, bilingual). Crucially, language mode was only phonetically cued via the stimuli of the VOT continua. The study included 2 experiments. In the first experiment, simultaneous Spanish-English bilinguals and beginning adult learners of Spanish showed language-specific perceptual boundaries in independent unilingual sessions, thus replicating Gonzales & Lotto (2013), and extending the finding to L2 learners. In the second experiment Spanish-English bilinguals and late learners of Spanish identified stimuli drawn from the VOT continua in a single, bilingual session. Both early and late bilinguals showed mode-specific perceptual normalization criteria in conditions of rapid, random mode switching. Importantly, the study showed that bilinguals can exploit language-specific perceptual processes in real time and that this ability appears to be modulated by language proficiency in late learners.

Gonzales et al. (2019) continued this line of research by examining whether conceptually-based language selection, which is frequent in the spoken modality, is also possible in the listening modality. In their experiment, Spanish-English bilinguals and French-English bilinguals listened to a /b/-/p/ continuum of the beginnings of language neutral pseudowords (Spanish-English: bafri, pafri; French-English: befru, pefru) and indicated which "word" the speaker was beginning to say. The language context was manipulated conceptually through the instructions only. The study showed that both groups displayed different voicing boundaries that corresponded with the language they believed they were hearing. This suggests that conceptually-based perceptual categorization is possible in highly proficient bilinguals.

In sum, previous research suggests that bilinguals can maintain some degree of separation between sound systems. Language-specific perceptual categorization can be phonetically cued in both early and late bilinguals (Gonzales & Lotto, 2013; Casillas & Simonet, 2018), and conceptually cued in early bilinguals (Gonzales et. al, 2019). The present study builds on this line of research by investigating whether the double phonemic boundary effect can be conceptually cued in adult second language learners of different proficiencies.

(Word count: 1020)
