The study
	- important to replicate findings
	- specific addition of our study
	- design problems we're overcoming

The present article is a conceptual replication of Casillas & Simonet (2018). In their study, they compared the double phonemic boundery effect in simultaneous bilinguals and beginner adult L2 learners of Spanish. Results indicated that whereas simultaneous bilinguals display the double phonemic boundery effect when acoustically cued in both bilingual and unilingual modes, adult L2 learners showed the effect in the unilingual mode. When L2 learners were faced with the bilingual mode, only the more proficient learners displayed the effect. 

In our replication, we explore whether the double phonemic boundary effect can be conceptually cued in adult second language learners (participants were explicitly instructed that they were hearing English or Spanish) as opposed to acoustic cues (inclusion of the Spanish or English realization of the segment **r**). Specifically, we explore how late Spanish-English bilinguals categorize the /b/-/p/ acoustic continuum varying in VOT.  Importantly, we assessed how L2 proficiency impacts the double phonemic boundary effect in adult learners during unilingual mode. 

Specifically, we try to answer the following research questions: 

1. Can second language learners be conceptually cued to adopt a specific unilingual mode?
2. Does L2 proficiency modulate their ability to separate the two phonemic systems?

We predict that speakers will categorize phonemes based on conceptual cues. Additionally, conceptually cued language-specific phonetic categorization develops as a function of language proficiency, such that adult L2 learners of Spanish will display different phonemic boundaries for each language as proficiency in Spanish increases. If these results were born out, then the existence of independent phonemic systems for each language would be confirmed, as well as the shift between language modes based on conceptual cues alone.

(Word count: 272)
